Good morning.
Let's see if I got
everything working here.
All right, so we're here to talk
about the Darwin Kernel.
I hope you guys are all excited about it.
It's tough to get excited
at 9 o'clock in the morning,
but it's better than last session
on Friday like we had last year.
So what are we going to talk about today?
First of all,
we're talking about the Darwin Kernel
and how that defines the core set
of services inside of Mac OS X.
Basically,
everything you do affects your code.
Everything in the kernel
affects your code,
whether you're using it or not.
So it's important for everybody
to understand how the kernel
is affecting their work.
And also that while the
kernel is fairly stable,
it's still under constant refinement.
Most of the time we're refining
the implementations of things.
But we're also talking about
refining the semantics and syntax
of certain areas of the kernel.
And we want to give you a heads
up on what those things are.
So what you're going to
learn in this session is,
you know, which services may be
affecting your code,
how they're affecting your code,
and how I'm going to do that is to
give a brief overview of how the
kernel services play into the kernel.
to the higher level
services in the system.
And therefore how that
may be affecting you.
Talk about some of the changes
we have planned for Jaguar.
Some of those are already
on the CD you have.
Some of those are still to come.
Some may not make it,
so this is all just a tentative list
of some of the things we're looking at.
And also looking at some of the
things that are coming beyond Jaguar.
So give you a heads up on some
of the things we're looking at.
Again, this is really a tentative list.
We want you to help us drive that
list of things that are coming.
Some of the things that
we need to look at,
we need to do.
But we also want to give you a heads
up on some of those things that
we're already thinking about doing.
All right,
and this is the classic picture
you've seen time and time again,
the multi-layered facet of
Mac OS X with Darwin as the core.
and the traditional picture
of the Darwin Kernel.
It is composed of three basic components,
the BSD Kernel, the Mach Kernel,
and Iocat.
But we tend not to... Sorry.
Where did that come from?
Well, the Mac code came from Mac 3.0,
basically the OSFMK 7.3 code,
if you were here last year.
Nothing different.
We have not picked up
any new version of Mac.
There really aren't new whole
versions of Mac to pick up.
But that defines the virtual memory,
the scheduling,
and the inter-process communication
that happens in the system,
at least the fundamental
versions of those things.
Our BSD code was originally
from BSD 4.4.Lights2.
That defines the process model,
the scheduling,
the security model in the system.
Mac has some security features,
but it's mostly security policy agnostic.
So the BSD part of the system is
what defines the security policy
for the rest of the system.
And it also defines the
file management system.
And also we had the networking
code came from FreeBSD.
FreeBSD as well.
While we're not really talking
about the networking code,
it's important to kind of see
how that all came together.
For a large part of the system,
including the networking
code and the NFS system,
those have been refreshed in the Jaguar
timeframe to come up to FreeBSD 4.4.
But the rest of the kernel,
while looking at FreeBSD 4.4,
what it defines as services and semantics
and syntax is really important to us.
Our versions of those parts of the
system are radically different in
implementation than the FreeBSD version.
So you can't just take whole cloth
those sections of the system and bring
them forward to the current day Jaguar
system or the current day Darwin Kernel.
So we've more picked and looked
at certain aspects of that code
and have decided what parts we
like and what parts we don't,
how we can bring those in.
But we cannot possibly take new refreshes
of that whole cloth hunks of code.
[Transcript missing]
So, but we don't really like to look
at the system as Mach BSD I/O Kit,
especially the Mach BSD differentiation.
We have a unified kernel.
We're not really that interested
in experimenting and showing how
to the world that you can implement
BSD as a user-level service.
It's not at all interesting to us.
What is interesting is
the silos of service,
the vertical services that are provided,
the process management, the threading,
right, and Mach and BSD provide services
in each of those areas combined.
They make up what we have
in the kernel as services.
And when you look at that
in the services area,
what's new for Jaguar?
Well, we've had a lot of performance
enhancements in Jaguar.
That's probably our primary goal,
performance and stability.
And so a lot of the implementations
have been refined on a lot of
things throughout the kernel.
But one of the things that we look
at all the time for performance is
not just to make this call run 10%
faster or that call run 5% faster,
but to look at the higher-level services
and the higher-level applications
and try to define new services or
change the semantics of some of the
existing services to let them run faster.
And so provide better matching
of the services to the higher
level is something that we're
really always watching out for,
and there's a lot of that in Jaguar.
[Transcript missing]
And just reams of new bug fixes
and reams of new features.
Just in the pure kernel part,
not counting the file system
implementations of the networking part,
but the pure part that I showed earlier,
there's been over 600
enhancements since Puma,
since 10.1 released.
But where are we going?
More and more performance enhancements.
This is one of our primary goals,
something you'll see us doing
over and over and over again.
Again, the same two areas.
Implementation of existing
services and working our way
towards new and better services.
Yet more standards adherence.
There are still some things in
POSIX that we don't support,
and we're constantly striving to have
essentially a POSIX-compliant system.
And a single-user--single-unit
specification.
That's been moving along faster
and a little bit further in
front of just the standard POSIX.
And we've been looking at
tracking those things as well,
and we're going to be implementing
a lot of the things that are there.
But one of the things that is really
new coming forward is this notion
of rigorously defined KEXT services.
We've had, in I/O Kit land,
we've had a strong and fairly rigid set
of things you can do in I/O Kit when
you develop an I/O Kit KEXT.
We do not have those same kind of
systems in place when you're writing
network kecks or file system kecks.
And basically what people have
done is adopt the BSD model,
which is you reach in and you
grab whatever you need and
write a kecks that accesses all
the internal data structures,
knows about all the function calls and
every little bit of the internal thing,
and build kecks out of that.
And in essence, you've got to,
every release of the system,
you've got to re-roll that kecks
and get a new kecks because it's
not going to run in an old system.
Well, that doesn't really match very
well with Mac OS X as a commercial
product because obviously people
don't like to have to go out and buy
or get an upgrade version of their
file system every time Apple decides
to roll out an update release.
And so we're looking at,
now that we've gotten the
higher-level services,
the ones towards user-level applications,
fairly well complete,
we're now looking internally and
trying to define those services so
we can get better release-to-release
compatibility for your kecks.
And of course,
just constantly new features
and other bug fixes.
So when we look at the services
provided by the kernel,
We need to go through and kind
of describe to you what it is
that each of these services does
and what we've changed in them.
So in the process world,
everything starts with a Mach task.
A Mach task is the unit of
ownership inside of Mach.
All the resources that are mock-related
are defined and held in a task.
So in essence, it provides an environment
in which threads run.
So you've got an address space,
a set of communication rights to
communicate to other parts of the system,
and exception handling to handle faults
or whatever inside of that space.
and a Mach task is represented by
a data structure called a task T.
It's available to you when you're
programming at higher levels,
but...
Each BSD process actually
contains a Mach task.
So you have a BSD process.
It's got a Mach task.
It uses the Mach task in certain ways.
When you try to access and
manipulate the Mach task directly,
you have to be careful not to
step on or interfere with some
of the things that BSD does.
We try to solve some of that for you,
like we don't let you terminate a
task out from underneath a process.
You have to come through and actually,
if it's a BSD process,
you have to come through an exit
call in the BSD level to get the
process to go away or shoot it with
a signal that's got a fatal handler.
So we've done some of that work for you,
but obviously there's some other things.
If you suspend a task out from
underneath of a BSD process,
well, you're going to get behavior
that BSD is not going to do.
and expecting and may or may not, uh,
provide the capability
you're looking for.
So each BSD process contains a Mach task.
You're normally gonna program at the
BSD process level for most things.
And it adds a file management
part of the process,
or I use process as its own
set of file descriptors.
It adds signal handling
in the Mach level.
We had exception handling
at the task level.
BSD is an exception handling client
of Mach and provides-- turns those
around and makes those signals.
So there's an interesting mix
when you interact with the signals
at BSD level and the exception
handling at the Mach level,
and something you always
have to be careful of.
And it provides process naming,
a Mach task.
You can have umpteen
Mach tasks in the system.
There is no name space
for the Mach tasks.
They're just out there.
You need to know them before
you can even find them.
And it provides a process
group relationship.
and it's normally
represented through the PID.
Now, normally you're working along
in a process and you're,
you know, doing standard BSD things,
fork, exec, all of those.
But there's this one call that
basically opens Pandora's box for you,
and it's called task for PID.
It's a new call just in Darwin,
and it basically, not new,
but it's been there from the beginning,
but it's only in Darwin.
And it basically allows you to
get at the underlying task for
certain PIDs and manipulate them.
And while that's, you know,
a really powerful feature because
Mac has all these third-party task
manipulation facilities where most of
the BSD stuff is within my process,
it also has problems,
and we'll talk about some of that later.
Okay, but most of you are not even
programming to BSD processes.
You're programming to
a Mac OS X application.
All right, and in Mac OS X applications,
there's an additional
BSD Processes Head process groups.
There's this additional notion
inside of a Mac OS X application,
this notion of a session and
services that are provided by
the core services of the system.
You have pasteboard services,
and you have the clipboard,
and you have input services and
Apple events and all of those
things that add on to what you
get in a standard BSD process.
And those are managed in
a scope called a session,
basically the login session, if you will.
And that adds additional burdens
and additional interactions
to some of the things that
you might do at the BSD level.
And we'll talk about some of that
in the security part of this.
And it provides additional and
different ways to get things launched.
In typical fashion,
you would use launch services
or just use the Docker finder
or whatever to get applications
launched at the Mac OS X level.
They all go through the
launch services of the system.
And there is an interaction issue, right?
Because most of these services that
are in that session are represented
by Mach ports and are per session.
And fork at the Unix level does
not inherit any of the Mach ports
that are associated with a task.
It just basically creates a new task,
shared memory space, but no shared ports.
You can end up with an issue if you're in
a Mac OS X application and you call fork.
You can end up in a situation where the
address space of the new application that
you got by forking thinks that there are
certain services available to it that it
had already established connections to,
but they're not there because the
ports that back those aren't there.
So, again, this is, you know,
one of those areas where
you have to be careful when
dealing at the higher levels.
Don't dip down to the BSD or
the Mach level too much.
And if you do, be careful about some of
these interaction issues.
So what's new in Jaguar in this space?
All right, well, performance,
performance, performance,
there's...that's our main goal.
But process creation and process exit,
there's been a lot of work to make
those even faster than they were before.
One of the big areas,
now that in the BSD world,
signals are part of the process space,
we now have a lot more adherent
POSIX signal semantics.
And so we have all the SIG action
options that we were missing in 10.1.
But where are we going?
Well, performance boost,
performance boost, performance boost.
That's basically where we're going.
One of the things beyond just
trying to make what we do better is
trying to make our services match
the higher-level services better.
Launch Services is a
spawn kind of facility.
It allows applications
to just be created.
It's not make a copy of myself and
then turn myself into something.
It's just create.
And so we're looking at things like
the POSIX spawn or other versions,
variants of the same thing to provide
facilities for the higher levels
that match their semantics better.
And we're looking at, you know,
even more of the POSIX signal stuff.
POSIX now defines 128 different
signal levels that you can send.
There's definitely some interest
from some of the people.
I think if you have
interest in that area,
you ought to bring that forward.
But POSIX also specified in their
real-time versions a real-time
signal delivery mechanism.
We've looked at that, and we've decided,
well, you know, we like the 128.
That sounds pretty good.
But the real-time delivery kind of
conflicts with some of the real-time
behaviors that we have for other things,
and in particular,
conflict with some of the run
loop support and things like that.
And so we're probably not
going to delve into that world.
Alright, so now we have processes.
Processes are basically an
area in which threads run.
So let's talk about threads.
Well, every thread in the
system is a Mach thread,
pretty much.
There are some things that people
call threads at some of the higher
level that aren't fully Mach threads,
but everything you're going to
typically deal with is a Mach thread.
A Mach thread is the unit
of execution in the system.
It's what the scheduler schedules.
It owns no resources of its own.
It is simply a state.
It describes an execution
state within a set of resources
that's a task or a process.
It defines the how and
the where of execution,
but not what to execute with.
There's thread-specific exception
handling at the Mach level.
So you can grab exception handlers.
You know, you can register exception
handlers at the per-thread
level and do certain things.
A lot of you may be tool writers,
and this has been something that
people have been doing is grabbing
the Mach exceptions basically before
BSD gets them so that they don't
become signals and kill the process
out from underneath of your tools.
And thread T is the basic data
structure that's defined there.
And again, you can create and terminate.
Again, one of the generic differences
between BSD services and
Mach services is Mach services
are always third-party enabled.
So any process can reach out and do all
the Mach services to some other entity.
They don't have to just
do it to themselves.
And that provides a real carrot for
people to delve into the Mach services
because you can reach over and
manipulate this other address space,
or you can reach over and stop this other
thread without the thread's consent and
doing things like that if you have the
privileged port that lets you do it.
So people have been striving to
find ways to get those privileged
ports so that they can do this.
We urge you to be careful.
When you manipulate something out from
underneath of itself without its consent,
it's not going to work.
And often you're going to get
in trouble with the higher-level
services that are depending upon
a known state in that thing.
But one of the things you can
do and is fairly well-defined
is the exception handling.
is the developer of the kernel,
and he's going to talk
about the kernel system.
All right, and it's our portable layer
of threading in the system.
You can pretty much create a
Pthread at any level of our system
and any application space and
get fairly well-defined behavior.
Not only do they provide, you know,
an easier way to create and set
them up than the Mach threads,
because Mach threads have no resources,
Pthreads have resources.
And so you can just tell Pthreads,
create one,
and it creates the resources for you,
rather than you having
to do that manually.
It also provides synchronization,
which the Mach threads don't
have any native form of
synchronization inside a process.
They simply can use global
synchronization services,
but they don't have anything
inherent to the process.
And Pthreads adds, you know,
synchronizers in the form
of mutexes and conditions.
You've got thread-specific
resources as well.
You've got a stack,
and you've got per-thread data.
And basically, you can do the standard
Pthreads things with those.
At the higher levels,
I don't want to spend a
whole lot of time on this,
but each MP task or Carbon thread
has essentially a Pthread underneath,
and that has a Mach thread
underneath of it.
But there are some situations like
deferred threads in the IOSpace
at Carbon and others where certain
behaviors are dependent upon,
right, of those threads,
and they may be multiplex,
so you may have deferred work.
There may be one worker thread
doing all the deferred thread work
inside of a Carbon application,
so you've got to be careful,
especially in those environments,
not to do something to the thread
that will affect other things that
depend upon using that same thread.
What's new in threading in Jaguar?
Performance.
Again, faster creation,
faster termination of threads.
So you can create almost two
times as many threads per second
in Jaguar as you could in 10.1.
P-thread synchronizers.
Well, we now have read-write locks at
the P-thread level in Jaguar.
We have recursive mutexes,
or we will be having recursive
mutexes in the near future.
And we have, or will be having improved
P-thread cancel semantics as well.
More adherent to the standards.
But a big thing we have that
a lot of people have asked
for is per-thread signals.
And so that's in Jaguar
or on the CD you've got.
Thank you.
Where are we going?
Again, better adherence to the
standards for Pthreads.
There are certain small APIs that
we're not adherent to at this point.
Most of the big things I think
we've got covered at this point,
but we've got some things more to do.
Another thing we're doing
is at the Mach level,
there has never been the notion of,
at the thread and task level,
the ability to look at something
without manipulating it.
And because of that task for
Pid and the ability to reach out
and grab third-party threads,
a lot of you are using those
things to just gather statistics
or to look at their state,
but not to control them.
And so we've been looking at and are
probably going to be adding in the
future the ability to separate those
semantics of access without control.
But all this just leads to the scheduler.
Threads are uninteresting
if they don't get scheduled.
So a lot of you have struggled
with this particular area as well.
Well, what is all of the scheduling
information inside of Darwin?
How do you do it?
How does it affect the
higher-level things?
Basically, we've got a banded priority
space inside of Darwin,
and in particular, Mac OS X,
where most of the
application threads run.
If you just create something
that runs in the background
off of a terminal or whatever,
you're going to end up
in this priority space,
0 to 31,
where things just get time-shared
in and out in that space,
which means their priorities
adjust up and down based on the
amount of CPU they're using.
And so we kind of be fair at that level.
But we've added, you know,
the ability to have these
time-constrained threads,
which are threads which,
which run under very strict
constraints for real-time.
You obviously can't allow a real-time
thread to just kind of adjust and
be fairly scheduled in the system.
It has to respond to very real-time
events in the outside world under
time constraints that obviously
that standard kind of adjusting
time-share policy wouldn't allow.
And so we've added the ability to
create time-constrained threads.
You'd specify the constraints,
the kernel, you know,
the amount of time it
takes for you to execute,
the amount of time,
the period at which you have to respond,
and we'll compute a priority for you.
Right now we do that very simply.
We assign them all the same priority,
but in the future we're
actually going to be using that.
So be careful.
But anybody can create a
time-constrained thread.
You can just say, create me one.
And the reason you can do
that is they're watched.
We won't allow a time-constrained thread.
We're not going to allow a
time-constrained thread to take over
the system and not give it back.
It can take it over for a little while,
but it'll eventually give
it back because we watch it.
There is no portable interface to that.
You can't--there's no Pthreads or, uh,
uh, Standard POSIX way to
create one of these threads.
That's an invention strictly to Darwin.
And we've also got a band of
priorities for GUI application threads.
The Windows Server and other things
help assign a set of priorities to
anything that responds to GUI events,
such that, you know,
you get quick response to
clicking throughout the system.
And those tend to fall in
that range from 63 to 31.
And then we have all these
other magic priority ranges,
basically where the kernel runs
and where the core services run.
One of the struggling points
that people have with all of this
is how do I get in that space?
And hopefully I can cover
that in a little bit.
But you can also create fixed
priority threads in the system,
but...
There's a problem with those,
and that is that once you
create a thread fixed,
it can take over the system or anything
below that and deny anything lower a
priority service throughout the system.
And so that operation is privileged.
Basically,
the Mach scheduler assigns threads,
runnable threads, to processors,
and we do that symmetrically
on a multiprocessor system.
So we will run threads on
any available processor.
But it's tuned for affinity to
try and run the same thread on
the same processor to keep the
same cache set and other things.
It's a fully preemptive scheduler,
which means that whenever a
higher priority thread gets
set running in the system,
it will preempt immediately any user
level thread that is available at a
lower priority that's taking a CPU.
And it'll also preempt threads
that are running in the kernel,
but only if the thread waking up
is marked as a real-time thread.
BSD adds some things on top of that,
and mostly in the realm of Pthreads,
the ability to set via Pthreads
the scheduling attributes.
But one of the problems with
that model is that it assumes,
basically the POSIX model assumes
a system-wide view of things,
that you understand the priority
of everything else in the system,
and you know exactly
where you want to go,
right?
And you can assign your priority.
Well, in our system,
that's almost impossible to figure out,
because there's applications
written by many developers running
on the system at the same time,
so you can't possibly do that.
So we allow the Pthread
attributes to be used,
but we restrict it to that range
that's basically for timeshare threads,
so you can adjust your priorities
using Pthreads within that realm,
but you can't use that facility
to get yourself up into some of
the higher levels of the system.
[Transcript missing]
And again, in each environment,
we allow for these time-critical threads,
but we have this problem with trying to
[Transcript missing]
So we have some new things
in Jaguar to go in this area.
We have better SMP support,
so we will immediately now set a
higher priority thread running on the
other processor than what was already
running on the other processor.
It used to be that would take a while.
So for some of you that have
real-time apps that need the power
of both processors in real-time,
this actually provides now
the ability to do that.
It also provides stronger affinity
than what used to be in the scheduler,
so that we will work harder
to keep the same threads
running on the same processor.
But obviously we're not going to let that
override the real-time nature of things.
is the head of the Kernel
Management Team at Mac OS X.
Jim is the head of the Kernel
Future directions.
Again, enhanced priority inheritance.
We really are looking for a way
to make sure that we can drive
threads through to completion,
even though the lower-level threads
have got something locked in the
kernel that you need or locked
at user space that you need.
And we will make that, you know,
in the future,
we're looking at making that
the default in the system.
We want real-time behavior out of
the system without programmers having
to program everything for real time.
Right now, almost every queuing mechanism
in the system is FIFO,
which means you get a whole
slew of low-priority threads
queued up on something.
High-priority thread
comes along and wants it,
and it's going to have to wait in turn
for all those low-priority threads,
except for the processor,
to get that resource.
And so while we have priority
queuing in the processors,
we're looking at trying to make
a more widespread use of priority
queuing throughout the system that,
again,
give much better real-time response.
And one of the things we're looking at,
and this is really kind of up in the air,
is a producer-consumer type queuing
mechanism that will allow you to have
threads that either feed or suck the
data off of one of these time constraint
threads in such a way that you don't have
to manually black art set its priority,
and yet it will adjust its priority
based on its ability to keep up with
the real-time threads to try and help us
help you get over this problem without
basically locking in the threads.
And in the future, we will be, again,
doing real-time critical priorities.
So don't fake out your time constraints
that you provide to the time
constraint setting mechanism right now,
because eventually those
will be used for something.
The kernel also provides a
bunch of files mechanism.
The files,
Mac has no notion of what a file is.
It has no concept of file systems.
But it has a concept of memory objects,
and it manages all the
cache data in the system.
It manages the physical
pages in the system,
and it manages the logical assignment
of pages to things called objects.
It will fill all of
memory with cache data,
unlike a lot of systems that
will only fill 10% of the memory
with cache data from files,
or 20% or 15%. It will just fill
up all of memory with cache data.
This actually is a very nice thing for a
lot of your applications because you have
very large data sets in some of these,
and restricting you to only small parts
of the memory for caching tends to be
a performance problem on some systems.
But it also has its drawbacks,
and so you have to be very careful
how you manage your data such that
you don't swamp the rest of the
system and push everything else out.
All the backing store for all
these pages is managed by pagers.
And the biggest pager in our system,
or the most common pager,
is actually the file system
pager that's built into BSD.
But on top of that,
we also have a default
pager which swaps files,
swaps pages out that are just
dynamically allocated in the system.
And that's called the default pager.
And how all this works is that
these memory objects then get mapped
into parts of your address space.
So it gives you access to these objects.
If you're not actually mapping the file,
but you're using the file system in BSD,
each one of these objects can represent,
and often does represent,
a single VNode or a
single file on the system.
And so we support traditional
read-write semantics through files,
by essentially the file system
inside of BSD uses the Mach objects
and the Mach cache to provide
the data into and store the
cache data for each of the files,
and we do that through a thing
called universal buffer cache.
And that's why you get this ability,
because they're all just
memory objects in the system,
the ability to just fill up
memory with all of your caching.
But it also supports the MMAP semantics
inside of POSIX by essentially
directly letting you map those
objects into your address space.
This is what DYLD does and the
loader does in the system to
just give you your task image.
But it's also what you can do
manually to get active files.
And it has a clustering support to
do more efficient loading of that
data and writing of that data back
to disk with a smaller number of IOs.
And at the application level,
even higher above,
you have asynchronous support.
Well,
the BSD file system is all synchronous.
All the semantics there are synchronous.
So you end up having at the higher
levels worker threads that help
you do asynchronous semantics.
They emulate the asynchronous behavior.
There's also the ability to
access additional data from
traditional file systems.
You can access the resource
forks and things like that,
which are all... Oh, I'm sorry.
Wrong one.
Because at the BSD level,
you don't have a notion of
separate seek pointers on a file.
You have a file that has
a current seek pointer,
but the higher-level
application semantics,
both in Carbon and in Cocoa,
had the ability to give you
access to ranges of files,
and you can have multiple
threads coming in and trying to
simultaneously access a file.
You needed to lock things out at user
space and arbitrate over the control
of where the current seek pointer is
for a file to try and keep threads
from fighting over it and moving it
out from underneath of each other.
And that was all handled
at the higher levels.
And then you had the legacy
emulation for things that some of
our file systems just can't support,
some of the resource forks and
catalog search kind of things.
[Transcript missing]
And if you implement some-- one of
the things that comes along with that
is if you are a file system writer,
we've noticed at least in
several of the file systems
that people have written so far,
that they were not expecting
these larger page lists,
these larger clusters
to be coming through,
and it confused them a little
bit in their implementation,
so you might want to watch out for that.
But one of the things we've also added is
in the POSIX PREAD and PWRITE semantics,
or APIs, that now gets us away from that
locked-out file seek pointer
problem that I talked about earlier.
You no longer have a single
current offset in a file.
These calls take the offset
as part of the parameter,
right?
And so now multiple threads can issue
I/Os to the same file simultaneously
to different parts of the file,
and the system will deal
with that just fine.
Where are we going?
Obviously, caching is important.
Performance going to
the disk is important,
so our clustering and caching
is something that we're gonna be
working on for quite a while now.
This is one of the biggest areas
that you notice performance.
And we're headed towards true async
file I/O so that we can get rid
of those worker threads at user
space and do everything directly
through the kernel async support.
[Transcript missing]
But again,
the file system is only as good as
the virtual memory system because it's
housed on the virtual memory system.
All right, and Mac basically creates this
very complex view of the world.
You have objects mapped
into the address spaces.
The objects are backed by files
which are implemented by pagers
inside the BSD file system,
which use clustering to get
to the disk to do their work.
And Mac basically is the
arbiter of all of that.
All right, it allows every address space
to be laid out uniquely and in
a pattern of their own choosing,
mapping objects and creating
anonymous memory however they like.
provides protected address spaces so
that what I have mapped into my address
space is available to everyone else.
So I can map that file without worrying
about someone who doesn't have access
to that file getting at the data.
It has these copy-on-write
optimizations that are well
published inside of it for mapping.
It's mostly good for mapping
copies of text and copies of data
from files into address spaces in
such a way that as you-- for text,
you typically don't touch it at all.
But you may when a debugger comes along,
and you would really hate to have
a debugger write a break point
into a mapped file and actually
have that show up on the file.
That would be very, very bad.
And so you essentially,
whenever an executable is
mapped into the system,
it's mapped in copy-on-write just in case
somebody's gonna come along and touch it.
And so from an
optimization point of view,
that is dramatically better
than going ahead and pulling in,
you know,
unique copies of those things for
every instance that's running.
And it allows for controlled
sharing at various levels,
single-page level,
sharing ranges of a mapped file,
to sharing complex regions.
And in fact, we do that in the system.
As you noticed,
we have a lot of frameworks
inside of our system that most
applications are using all of them,
or a large portion of them.
Just the overhead of mapping in 127
or 100 and something frameworks into
every application is part of launching.
Right?
Can be a fairly onerous task.
And so we optimize that for you.
We have a shared region in the system.
This is optional use,
but the linker currently
at the higher level,
DYLD, uses it fairly heavily.
That allows you to have global regions
that are mapped into everybody.
And that's where he maps
in all of the frameworks.
So that everybody gets a
shared mapping of that.
And the way that works is,
you come along and let's
just look at the global part.
Again, behind every mapping is an object,
and behind the object is
a pager memory object,
and that may go to the disk, right?
But you take a fault
in one of those areas,
right?
Well, normally, every application,
when it takes a fault,
would query the VM system,
would handle the fault, and say, okay,
what file is mapped there?
Here he realizes that it's a
global region that's mapped there,
and he sends the request on to the global
region who forwards it on to the object,
who creates a mapping
for a temporary file,
basically a placeholder.
But unlike normal,
this actually shows up in every
address space at the same time
because it's a true shared mapping.
So everybody gets the placeholder.
One guy's driving the fault,
but when the data is finally
supplied by the pager,
it shows up everywhere and it's a very,
very good example of how to do this.
Typically, if I have a file and you
have the same file mapped,
when I take a fault,
I would get a translation for my
page that lets me access that,
but you don't.
And so when you access it,
you would have to go
and go to the VM system.
He says, oh, the page is in cache.
That's no problem.
Here's a translation.
But you still have to take a fault,
right, for it to find it and provide
a translation unique to you.
Because these global regions are shared,
the translations are shared,
so any application faulting in a page
from the core foundation or from the
system framework actually makes that page
immediately available to everybody so
they don't even have to take the faults.
So where are those areas
located in the system?
Well, in 10.1,
there was two 256-megabyte regions where
they sat at 7 bazillion and 8 bazillion,
respectively.
All right.
And these map the system-wide frameworks,
right, and gave you that multiple
level of efficiency.
But they kind of got in your way,
didn't they?
If you needed to allocate large
portions of virtually contiguous memory,
we didn't leave you very many big open
spaces with the way this was laid out.
So in Jaguar, we're moving them.
Right now,
they're moved up a little bit so that
you now have just under 2 gigabytes
of available space to you maximum,
you know,
between your heaps and these spaces.
We've also dramatically improved the
ability of the system to determine
what you're using in your space.
So we have task-working sets.
They were in 10.1,
but they've been enhanced in
Jaguar to do a better job of,
if you touch one page,
knowing what pages you touched
around that same page last time,
and getting them all in at the same
time so that you don't have to take
a fault on every page you access if
you're needing to bring pages in.
So when you get to the point where
you launch the N plus 1 application,
where N fits in memory
and N plus 1 doesn't,
this dramatically improves your
ability to switch back and forth
between those applications.
And also there's preheat,
so that we know when you've done
this once on an application,
that when you come along and
launch that application again,
we actually don't have to
build up the working set,
the initial working set.
It's already there and
remembered from the last time,
so we'll go ahead and
use that to bring in.
So second and third and fourth
launches are dramatically faster than
the first ever for an application.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so now we've got this task.
We're running.
We're doing all kinds of fun stuff,
but we're in a little silo.
We can't interact with
anything else in the system.
So we've got to have
inter-process communication in
order for everything to work.
A lot of the system depends upon Mac's
basic inter-process communication system,
which is a Mac port.
Sorry.
They're the endpoints of
communication within Mac.
They allow you to send messages
back and forth on message queues
or semaphores or lock sets,
basically synchronization
at those levels.
A Mac port is actually-- you
don't access a Mac port directly.
That's the endpoint.
What you have is a right to access that.
And these are represented by
send and receive rights and send
once rights inside a Mac that
allow you to communicate back
and forth to various services.
And in Mac itself,
almost every object in the system,
a task, a thread, the--
You name it.
VM object, those kind of things.
They're all represented by ports.
So in order to manipulate them,
you have to have a right to the port
to send a message to the port to say,
change yourself.
And that's how you get that third-party,
anybody can change
anybody else's behavior.
And these messages carry data,
they carry port rights,
and they also carry security information
to identify who the sender is.
And BSD adds, you know,
typical BSD IPC services on top of that,
sockets and pipes, POSIX semaphores,
both named and unnamed.
And Pthread synchronizers,
which have options to be
inter-process communication as well.
Right now,
those are all implemented on top of
Mach ports in such a way that it is very
difficult for us to export them across.
So right now,
all the Pthread synchronizers
are only intra-process,
so you can only use
them within a process.
All the options to go
cross-processes are disabled.
and then you have these
higher level concepts of IPC,
like the CFRunLoop, right?
And the CFRunLoop is all built
on the Mac side of things,
right?
So you have a port set, right,
which is a collection of ports.
Each port represents an object
or an event source in the system.
And so you sit and wait for a Mach event,
Mach port event to occur.
Well, a lot of the driving events,
a lot of the things that drive these
events are not Mach port based.
And so the CF code and CF networking
and CF socket and those things reflect
events from those into the port set,
right,
via worker threads or via call outs or
whatever it can work out to do that.
Most often it's a thread, right,
to drive it into the run loop so
that you can see it in your run loop.
[Transcript missing]
We have, again, from System 5,
we have the System 5 IPC, thanks to the
Darwin Development Organization,
the Darwin community.
Again, we'd like that to be
for compatibility only,
but it's there.
Where are we going?
Well, one of the things that we're
doing from the BSD side is looking
at adding the pole interface.
There's lots of things
in the way of doing that,
and so we've got to
work those issues out,
but we'd really like to do it.
In fact, you know,
we'd also like to look at
adding the BSD KQ support.
One of the things that looks really nice
about that is it looks like it could be
interchangeable with run loops in such
a way that you can choose to either use
a run loop to do your event processing
or you could use to do a KQ to do it,
depending upon the semantics of your app,
and still have the same event
sources providing data into both.
That's really just
something we're considering,
but it actually looks pretty good.
And more directly, you know, first,
we're looking at ways to do the
POSIX inter-process synchronizers.
And again, real-time being a key
factor in all of this,
we're looking at
inter-process communication.
security in the system.
Nothing here.
Now that you can share
and you're isolated,
now you have to be able to
do it in a controlled way.
Mac itself does no
authentication checking.
Everything it does is
based on capabilities.
If you have a port to
manipulate something,
you can do it.
[Transcript missing]
is the developer who runs the kernel.
He's been working on the
kernel for a long time.
Right,
and the V nodes inside of BSD provide
the cache of all of the permission
information from the file systems itself.
I won't be going into how
file systems do all of that.
But again, Mac OS X applications are much
more than just BSD processes.
And so there's additional security
semantics that are added on that,
and they interact with the
kernel services in certain ways.
One of the things that happens is
individual applications now have
unique capabilities in Mac OS X,
right?
Not just users.
So you can have an application
that has a keychain item,
right?
And that keychain item allows it to
decrypt a file or do a certain operation,
right?
And these have to be protected.
This is somewhat contrary to the
typical BSD model where every
process owned by a user is equal.
You don't have to protect any one process
from another process at that user level,
right?
[Transcript missing]
What's new in the security world?
Well, at the Mach level,
we've got security tokens added,
and the CFRunLoop provides those so that
people can do authorization on anything
that's mock-based at the CF level.
Where are we going?
Again, we're probably going to split
some of the Mach capabilities up,
especially in the thread
and task name port world.
And one of the big E's,
we're going to be restricting tasks
for PID in such a way that you
won't be able to reach out and grab
another task and manipulate it
without some kind of authorization,
some kind of privilege,
in order to protect those higher-level
keys from the application level.
And we've got people that are looking
at the system in a way to determine
if it's evaluatable in a secure way,
and we'll be looking at bringing some
of those changes into the base system.
We've got a new,
from serviceability part of the system,
we've got some new things.
We've got a new panic user experience.
We don't want the user to
ever experience a panic.
But the old panic was really bad.
It just scrolled over your screen
and just spewed data all over.
Now you've got a nice
little UI that pops up.
The panic data is saved
and captured on the reboot.
And so you can just cut and
paste a report and send it off.
You don't have to type in or copy the
data off the screen or take a digital
picture of the screen and send it in.
Again, we don't want users to ever panic,
but... All right.
And for people who write kernel services,
we've now got additional
debugger support,
including the ability to debug
across routers and things like that
so the debugger can handle arping.
And we've got K-Trace support
in the system as well,
so now you can trace things
using standard K-Trace tools.
Which leads us to KEXT services.
We've got, in Darwin,
we've got these KEXTs.
And IOK KEXTs.
We've always discouraged writing KEXTs.
If you can do it at user level,
please do,
because we don't want to repeat
the behavior and the instability
of 9 by having everything everyone
does written as a KEXT that can
bring the whole system down.
But we understood that most IOK things
needed to be done as a KEXT,
right, or a large number of them anyway,
right?
And we expected most
KEXTs to be IOK KEXTs.
But we've done it in such a way that
most of the hard work is done in
abstracted families and things like that,
so the actual KEXT is fairly small
and can be rigorously tested.
But then we've got all these other KEXTs,
right?
We've got BSD KEXTs that do
file systems and do networking,
right?
And BSD is BSD.
It's a traditional kernel,
opened up to the world,
so anyone can reach in and
do anything they wanted.
And it was based on that recompile model.
So what's new?
Well, non-IO kecks are still
highly discouraged,
even more so than they used to be.
And we will preserve the
binary compatibility of those
kecks for a little while,
probably not much beyond
this current release.
We don't know exactly when,
but at some point,
those things will break.
And you'll either have
to keep recompiling them
with every release or not.
But we need the ability to,
as some other companies often,
we need to be able to innovate.
And so right now,
we're locked out of innovating in
the kernel because we have kecks
that reach in and grab every little
private data structure we've got.
And we don't want to
break those binaries,
but we're going to have
to in order to go forward.
And so we're marking all the
non-sustainable APIs inside the
kernel as such in the header,
so that you'll have to turn
on a flag basically saying,
I understand.
I'm no longer using
sustainable interfaces,
right?
I'm going to have to figure out
something else to do in the future,
or I'm going to have to keep
tracking the kernel from release
to release to release to release.
So what we're doing in the future then,
we're doing that now,
and then in the future we're going
to be defining sustainable interfaces
for those file system and network
kecks so that binaries will be able
to go forward from release to release.
We're defining controlled access
to system services so people
can stop patching the system.
It's amazing what people do when they
have the kernel sources available to
them and they have the kernel fully
symboled and everything available.
They've been doing some really,
really bizarre things,
and we want to stop that.
and many of our services,
we're trying to figure out ways
to move things to user space.
Kecks are bad.
We want to do everything at
user space that we can do.
So we're trying to define interfaces
to move things up to user space.
And so whatever you're
doing in the kernel,
if any of you are kecks writers,
whatever you're doing,
and you need access to, come talk to us.
Send us your input.
We're really begging for it.
To help us figure out how to, A,
get you out of the kernel
in the first place,
and if not,
define a set of controlled and
sustainable interfaces for you
to use in the kernel so that we
don't have to go through this,
we jointly don't have to keep going
through this release after release.
All right,
so that pretty much covers everything.
The roadmap.
Well,
you want to talk about that KEXT thing
some more right after this in this
very session is managing KEXT.
So you want to definitely hang out
for that if you're a KEXT writer.
More of the security stuff
later this afternoon.
The Darwin feedback forum later today.
That's definitely something we're
interested in getting your feedback,
and if you can start giving
us some of that input on KEXT,
that would be great.
And to learn about some of the Pthread
stuff that's new in this release,
go to the Pthread session tomorrow
and learn about those there.
And on Friday,
the developing for performance.
We give you a lot of rope in this system.
We don't restrict you from very much,
but we also give you a
lot of rope to mess up the
performance of everybody else.
And so you really need to write
your applications in a way that
are not only performant for you,
but performant for the
rest of the system,
and that session on Friday will
cover a lot of that.
a lot of how to take that into account.
To contact Jason Yao is the
technology manager for CoreOS,
and you probably want to
send him any requests.
But we're also the Darwin developer
sites and the Darwin documentation.
If you have questions,
we're very responsive to
the Darwin development list.
We can talk things out on that list
if you don't want to go through
developer relations as well.